---
layout: post
title: What does "Yes" look like?
date: 2024-11-02 14:28 +0000
tags: devops tech softskills
---

"No" is an easy default response to big technical asks. It manages the risk and
expense of large projects with unknown complexity and (let's be honest) will
often take less of your time than a "Yes". Some times it's also the correct
answer. No, we can't make a square with three sides.

"No" usually doesn't help the business though. There's a reason the PHB is
asking for a square with three sides. It might also be tied to some fundamental
misunderstanding, but underneath the request is a problem they're trying to
solve (maybe they just need a triangle). Your job as a skilled devops
professional is to understand and help solve that problem.

As a matter of soft skills, you should generally address their question in some
way before telling them it sounds like the wrong question. "Squares
definitionally have four sides, but we do have the ability to make three-sided
polygons. They're called triangles, and they can only have one right angle
unlike a square."

By the time a technical request makes it from the business side over to the tech
organization, "yes" is really the only answer they'll accept. You might be
tempted to say "no" and leave it at that, but instead you should just tell them
what "yes" looks like.

Switching analogies, let's say the PHB wants to build a racquetball court as an
addition to the office building. Instead of saying "that's way out of budget and
we can't even get a building permit for that addition" try explaining what it
would take to make it work if you had unlimited resources. Explain the cost of
labor and materials for the building, the legal process of getting the permits,
the unsolved problem of where to fit such a building on the premises.

At the end if you can give a ballpark of the time and total cost and what other
projects will be deprioritized to accomplish it, your "yes, and" will have a
much stronger case than a "no". If you frame your answer as "yes" and then let
them discover that such a project isn't feasible, now you can work together to
figure out another solution.

If you had just flatly said "no" in the first place you're making the
interaction adversarial. With a "yes, and" it's collaborative. Alright, that
won't work but let's explore other solutions.

And now comes the best question you can ever ask a business person: "What
problem are we trying to solve?"

Contrary to popular belief, business people are pretty terrible at communication
so they generally don't think to start with the problem at hand. But once you
have that you can use your special engineer brain to find a solution. If the PHB
wants a racquetball court because they want to be able to play racquetball, you
can suggest they get a YMCA membership instead. Now you've solved their problem
and saved them a big pile of money. If you do this a few times you will be every
PHB's favorite engineer.